docs/1-provisioning-and-deployment.md, before:

# Provisioning and Deployment

Sources:

- https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-ansible-to-install-and-set-up-docker-on-ubuntu-20-04
- https://github.com/ansible/ansible-examples
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_tags.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_includes.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/tips_tricks/sample_setup.html

## Preparing SD for Raspberry Pi

Use the official [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) to create
microSD cards with Raspberry OS.

First create a keypair to use when connecting to the Raspberry Pis:

```
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "anesowa@raspberrypi"
```

Before flashing the card it asks you if you want OS customization, click "Edit
settings".

- Hostname: `raspberrypi`, `rpi-slave-1`, `rpi-slave-2`, ...
- Set username: `anesowa`.
- Set password.
- Configure wireless LAN.
- Services > Enable SSH: ON.
- Allow public-key authentication only > Set authorized_keys for 'anesowa': copy the
  public key from the keypair you created (`~/.ssh/raspberrypi_key.pub`) (e.g.
  `ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3... anesowa@raspberrypi`).

## SSH Prerequisites

You usually connect to that machine you just prepared with:

```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/raspberry_local anesowa@<Raspberry Pi IP Address>
```

The `<Raspberry Pi IP Address>` can be replaced with `<Raspberry Pi Host Name>.local` if
on the same LAN network because of the **mDNS**
[Multicast DNS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_DNS) solution Raspberry Pi
implements with Avahi (macOS uses Bonjour for mDNS).

If the key file is protected with a passphrase, for Ansible to run smoothly is better if
we make the system we deploy from cache that passphrase, there's two ways:

1. Running `ssh-add ~/.ssh/raspberry_local`

2. Adding an entry to the raspberry host on `~/.ssh/config` as follows:

```
Host 192.168.1.76 rpi-master.local rpi-master.home
  UseKeychain yes
```

If you want to go one step further and avoid to have to pass `-i ~/.ssh/raspberry_local`
to the `ssh` command:

```
Host 192.168.1.76 rpi-master.local rpi-master.home
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/raspberry_local
  UseKeychain yes
```

## Install PulseAudio

```
anesowa@raspberry:~ $ sudo apt install pulseaudio
anesowa@raspberry:~ $ systemctl --user start pulseaudio.service
```

## Configure Audio

For each Raspberry Pi you will need to do some manual pre-deployment steps.

1. [Configure the single or multiple speakers](2-rpi-sound-setup.md#usb-speaker) (USB or
   Bluetooth) that you will use for that Raspberry Pi.
2. [Combine the PulseAudio sinks](2-rpi-sound-setup.md#combining-sinks) so sound is sent
   to the speaker group.
3. [Persist the combined sink across reboots](2-rpi-sound-setup.md#persisting-configuration)
   (by adding `module-combine-sink` on the `PulseAudio Server Startup Script`).
4. [Enable PulseAudio comunication over TCP](3-docker-container-sound#docker-container-sound-on-raspberry-pi)
   (by adding `module-native-protocol-tcp` on the `PulseAudio Server Startup Script`).

⚠️ If you skip one of these manual pre-installation steps the container will fail either
due to failed communication with the host PulseAudio server or because no devices are
found.

## Running Ansible Playbook

First add the hosts on the inventary `ansible/inventory/hosts`:

```
[master]
rpi-master.home

[slaves]
rpi-slave-1.home
rpi-slave-2.home
rpi-slave-3.home
```

Deploy master:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit master
```

Deploy slaves:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit slaves
```

## Troubleshooting

You can print out ansible variables:

```
- name: Check if Docker is installed
  stat:
    path: /usr/bin/docker
  register: docker_result

- name: Check the stat result of checking for docker
  debug:
    var: docker_result
```

[Debugging tasks](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_debugger.html):
If you want to debug the output of a task you can place a debugger as follows:

```
- name: Synchronize project files
  debugger: always
  synchronize:
    src: "{{ project_root }}/"
    dest: /app/anesowa
    rsync_opts:
      - "--exclude-from={{ project_root }}/rsync_exclude.txt"
  tags:
    - sync-project
```

Then after running this task a breakpoint gets hit and you can inspect the command and
its output:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit master --tags sync-project

PLAY [master] *******************************************************************************************************************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] **********************************************************************************************************************************************************
ok: [rpi-master.home]

TASK [common : Synchronize project files] ***************************************************************************************************************************************
changed: [rpi-master.home]
[rpi-master.home] TASK: common : Synchronize project files (debug)> p result._result
{
 ...

 'cmd': '/usr/local/bin/rsync --delay-updates -F --compress --archive '
        "--rsh='/usr/bin/ssh -S none -i /Users/ramon/.ssh/raspberry_local -o "
        "StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null' "
        '--exclude-from=/Users/ramon/Devel/anesowa/rsync_exclude.txt '
        "--out-format='<<CHANGED>>%i %n%L' /Users/ramon/Devel/anesowa/ "
        'anesowa@rpi-master.home:/app/anesowa',
 'failed': False,
 ...
 'msg': '.d..tp...... ./\n'
        ...
        'cd++++++++++ playback-distributor/\n'
        '<f++++++++++ playback-distributor/README.md\n'
        '<f++++++++++ playback-distributor/playback_distri
```

TODO:Raspberry Pi < 4

Those Raspberry Pis will need an explicit install of the **PulseAudio** system, because
otherwise they only run on **ALSA**.

```
sudo apt install pulseaudio pulseaudio-module-bluetooth
```

Commit message:

Ansible Playbook for sound detector containers and services done.

docs/1-provisioning-and-deployment.md, after:

# Provisioning and Deployment

Sources:

- https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-ansible-to-install-and-set-up-docker-on-ubuntu-20-04
- https://github.com/ansible/ansible-examples
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_tags.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_includes.html
- https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.8/tips_tricks/sample_setup.html

## Preparing SD for Raspberry Pi

Use the official [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) to create
microSD cards with Raspberry OS.

First create a keypair to use when connecting to the Raspberry Pis:

```
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "anesowa@raspberrypi"
```

Before flashing the card it asks you if you want OS customization, click "Edit
settings".

- Hostname: `raspberrypi`, `rpi-slave-1`, `rpi-slave-2`, ...
- Set username: `anesowa`.
- Set password.
- Configure wireless LAN.
- Services > Enable SSH: ON.
- Allow public-key authentication only > Set authorized_keys for 'anesowa': copy the
  public key from the keypair you created (`~/.ssh/raspberrypi_key.pub`) (e.g.
  `ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3... anesowa@raspberrypi`).

## SSH Prerequisites

You usually connect to that machine you just prepared with:

```
ssh -i ~/.ssh/raspberry_local anesowa@<Raspberry Pi IP Address>
```

The `<Raspberry Pi IP Address>` can be replaced with `<Raspberry Pi Host Name>.local` if
on the same LAN network because of the **mDNS**
[Multicast DNS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_DNS) solution Raspberry Pi
implements with Avahi (macOS uses Bonjour for mDNS).

If the key file is protected with a passphrase, for Ansible to run smoothly is better if
we make the system we deploy from cache that passphrase, there's two ways:

1. Running `ssh-add ~/.ssh/raspberry_local`

2. Adding an entry to the raspberry host on `~/.ssh/config` as follows:

```
Host 192.168.1.76 rpi-master.local rpi-master.home
  UseKeychain yes
```

If you want to go one step further and avoid to have to pass `-i ~/.ssh/raspberry_local`
to the `ssh` command:

```
Host 192.168.1.76 rpi-master.local rpi-master.home
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/raspberry_local
  UseKeychain yes
```

## Install PulseAudio

```
anesowa@raspberry:~ $ sudo apt install pulseaudio
anesowa@raspberry:~ $ systemctl --user start pulseaudio.service
```

## Configure Individual Raspberry Pi Host Variables

Open up `ansible/host_vars/{host-name}.yml` and configure each value specifically such
as the name of the microphone to use and the Raspberry Pi version that host has.

## Running Ansible Playbook

First add the hosts on the inventary `ansible/inventory/hosts`:

```
[master]
rpi-master.home

[slaves]
rpi-slave-1.home
rpi-slave-2.home
```

Deploy master:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit master
```

Deploy slaves:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit slaves
```

## Troubleshooting

You can print out ansible variables:

```
- name: Check if Docker is installed
  stat:
    path: /usr/bin/docker
  register: docker_result

- name: Check the stat result of checking for docker
  debug:
    var: docker_result
```

[Debugging tasks](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_debugger.html):
If you want to debug the output of a task you can place a debugger as follows:

```
- name: Synchronize project files
  debugger: always
  synchronize:
    src: "{{ project_root }}/"
    dest: /app/anesowa
    rsync_opts:
      - "--exclude-from={{ project_root }}/rsync_exclude.txt"
  tags:
    - sync-project
```

Then after running this task a breakpoint gets hit and you can inspect the command and
its output:

```
eulersson@macbook:~/Devel/anesowa $ ansible-playbook ansible/site.yml -i ansible/hosts --limit master --tags sync-project

PLAY [master] *******************************************************************************************************************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] **********************************************************************************************************************************************************
ok: [rpi-master.home]

TASK [common : Synchronize project files] ***************************************************************************************************************************************
changed: [rpi-master.home]
[rpi-master.home] TASK: common : Synchronize project files (debug)> p result._result
{
 ...

 'cmd': '/usr/local/bin/rsync --delay-updates -F --compress --archive '
        "--rsh='/usr/bin/ssh -S none -i /Users/ramon/.ssh/raspberry_local -o "
        "StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null' "
        '--exclude-from=/Users/ramon/Devel/anesowa/rsync_exclude.txt '
        "--out-format='<<CHANGED>>%i %n%L' /Users/ramon/Devel/anesowa/ "
        'anesowa@rpi-master.home:/app/anesowa',
 'failed': False,
 ...
 'msg': '.d..tp...... ./\n'
        ...
        'cd++++++++++ playback-distributor/\n'
        '<f++++++++++ playback-distributor/README.md\n'
        '<f++++++++++ playback-distributor/playback_distri
```

TODO:Raspberry Pi < 4

Those Raspberry Pis will need an explicit install of the **PulseAudio** system, because
otherwise they only run on **ALSA**.

```
sudo apt install pulseaudio pulseaudio-module-bluetooth
```
